# Paradata: How the KG was Made

## Why this topic?

I wanted to use something that was relevant me and nothing is better for that than my own data that I have made at work. Over the last two years I have digitized several specices and content creators but the Museum of Nature does not really have a good understanting what I have done in relation to others. By mapping it we should have a better understanding what we have done in our department and what the creators themselves took photos of. To achieve this I wanted to make a knowledge graph on Gephi using our data. 

## Method

First step was exporting the data from Portfolio which came in a .txt file which I was able to turn into a .csv file realtively quickly (the original file is in the repo). Then I had to organize this data. Due to the lack of standardization when it comes to digitzation several fields were empty and this was also collecting and merging data from over 100 different people who entered the data. I was simply one of the many content creators. I decided to sort this by cataloguer as this was the main objective of the KG. This left me with 100 different .csv files sorted by who entered the data. I decided to focus on 3 individuals who make up the most entries in the system. This was myself, and my two coworkers Christina and Susan (Susan retired in July 2019 and Christina was hired to replace her). Susan accounts for roughly 40k images, I make up around 10k and Christina accounts for around 6500. After gaining these 3 seperate files I had to organize them. How I enter data is differently than the other two. I had to make sure we had a uniform system.

The next step was to add the creators to the node. This left me with 3 nodes for cataloguers and then several for creators. (you can see the evolution of the chart through the repo on the Roman Numeral). First the creators I have worked with were added, followed by Christina and then followed by Susan. Then I added the edges for each cataloguer and we could see the overlap with us 3. Some individuals had data entered by all 3, some by just 2 and others just by one of us. After completing this I had alot of time left so I moved on to adding species.  

This would show who is responsible for what and simply connect the nodes where there is overlap. However, I managed to complete that task relatively quickly so I decided to take it one step further. I added the species that the creators themselves have taken photos of. This meant going through the .csv file and sorting by creator and then simply adding the species they are credited with on the spreadsheet. For my data this was relatively easy as most of my creators have taken the same photos (or several of the same species) and this was quickly done. Christina look a while longer as she had more creators and more species diversity. 

This led me to a problem. Avoiding accidentally entering a node twice. Due to all 3 of our .csv being different it was not ideal to simply import the spreadsheet into Gephi. For me to have done that I would have had to organize the data through the 3 spreadsheets and I did not have the time for that. This meant I had to manually enter all the information for the graph which was fine and as someone who gets payed to enter data it is something I am used to and can do quickly thanks to all the practice. The worry was accidentally entering a species that was already in the system. As I was doing this by author there was a high chance of this happening. To avoid this I had to use the search function on Gephi to search for a species to make sure it was not already in the system. Moreover, I had to make sure I had not already linked the author to that species as it would regularily come up again in the spreadsheet. These two problems were incredibly frustrating but thanks to the search function most mistakes were avoided. I also opted to using their common name rather than the scientific one as this was meant for those who have digitized and most of them are not science people (like myself) and latin names would make the graph hard to use.

In the end I was able to enter the authors and their species for myself, Christina and half of Susan (she simply had too much to complete by the end of this class) but with their species being linked. After that I used the software itself to make 3 seperate versions. One simply based on what objects are and their links. The second based on the authors and the third is based on the cataloguers.   
## Conclusion

As this was my first time ever doing anything like this I am pleased with the result. The graph does show what the Library part of the Museum has digitized, and who we have digitized. In the future I would likely change how this was done and focus instead of making a spreadsheet and import it before hand if I had more time. I would also avoid using the common name as many species it turns out share common names. As in one species can have multiple common names. This means that there are probably some species that exist twice in the KG. I would also do the edges last. By using a uniform spreadsheet I can focus all my time on creating the relationships and build from there. A future project with this data would likely focus on the species themselves first and then maybe tie it back to the authors in the end.
